So we're talking with Ken Carpenter at home, and you're just telling me that you're trying to do your own book on libraries.
Well, we're just getting underway what we call a history of libraries in America, and the headquarters are at the center for the book at L.C., and letters are going out this week for, you know, to...
some people to serve on an executive committee and an advisory board.
And we're hoping for a three-volume work.
I'm going to be doing the part of 1893.
And Wayne Wiegand at the University of Wisconsin... His name has already been given to me, the second one now.
...is going to do the 20th Century...
And then we hope to have another volume that covers topics that we couldn't cover in our more chronological approach.
So while we're planning a very scholarly kind of book, we're hoping then afterwards to produce a
a history of libraries that obviously is going to be very different from yours.
Mine is not a history, and I'm not even, just as General Madness was not a history of book collecting.
It was very selective, it was anecdotal, it was a narrative, and I'm picking my spots.
Yes, that's right.
And so what I'm hoping is that yours will just whet the appetite for art.
It should.
And all I can say with Gentle Madness is that it did create a market in the minds of the publishers for books that they never would have touched.
And I can name the four or five books that came after mine, and I'm happy to see it, you know, Alberto Mangual's.
History of Reading, which I enjoyed enormously, and a few other books.
Really, that's wonderful.
That's wonderful.
I did demonstrate to these blockheads in New York that people who love books might want to buy a book about books in libraries.
It shouldn't be too difficult a concept to grasp.
That's right.
In terms of history, are you talking in terms of what
how they came into being philosophically?
Well, we're focusing on American libraries.
But, you know, you have to go back to Benjamin Franklin and the start of the library company in Philadelphia and outline the history of those kinds of institutions, those social libraries like the Boston Athenaeum that you just mentioned.
And then the
for the start of public libraries, and who was involved in the founding of them, and what the goals were, what societal functions were these libraries serving in the minds of the people who were behind them.
And so there's all kinds of
I mean, we want to get away from the purely institutional sort of approach and deal with other aspects.
Well, just to my mind, and I'm not a professional, but it seems to me you've got the public libraries, you've got the institutional libraries, and you have the national libraries, and I suppose there are many specialized ones in between.
Oh, there are many kinds.
But do you agree that the public libraries in particular...
began more or less as a university for the common people?
And this is a very general question.
You go anywhere you want.
Maybe is it losing that?
Is it drifting away from that function?
Well, certainly the public libraries began, you know, not just to circulate books.
They also were, as you say,
designed to be a university for the people.
They were also to have scholarly stuff with them.
They were to enable any citizen to have access to knowledge.
And yes, they were a university.
We emphasize, we tend to think of them as just, you know, circulating like stuff.
But
But that's a function that they came to have for themselves, whereas they started out to be much more than that.
And I think a good example of that is your own George Tickner.
Absolutely.
Who was here at Harvard and who chose to give his wonderful collection to the Boston Public Library instead of...
He was making a statement of the kind that you're making right now.
And Edward Everett, who, after all, was president of Harvard.
And while he was president of Harvard, was advocating that funds come to the library.
That's right.
But he chose to give his books over to the Boston Public Library.
So they were making that kind of a statement?
Absolutely.
That this material, you know?
Yeah.
we'll have a scholarly application.
Do you find that the public libraries are drifting away from that kind of a mandate?
Oh, I think they're drifting away from the scholarly mandate, to be sure.
What happened, I think, is that the motto of the ALA came to be something, and I don't have it exactly right, but
Probably, but the best books for the most people at the least amount of money.
More bang for the buck.
And inevitably, when an institution is dependent on taxpayer support, you want to be able to demonstrate that you have a high circulation, high use, high visibility.
And the way to do that is to give people...
you know, the books that they want.
But there's a real positive side to giving people books that they want, namely that here, you know, women, for instance, could come into the public library and get, you know, romances.
And scholars are beginning to understand the role of these.
romances in the lives of women.
So that in giving people what they wanted, they were serving a very important function for the community.
And it's not just the scholarly function that's important.
Do you see now with, let's face it, the computers, Bill Gates is pledging millions of dollars, and
real money and millions of dollars and his own software for libraries.
The whole thing in San Francisco was about technology.
Do you think that perhaps public libraries are just extending this idea of giving the people what they want by going into computers and kind of drifting away from printed books?
As many of them are.
I mean, their budgets have been cut for acquisitions.
Yeah, I guess they have been cut for acquisitions.
Although still, and if you talk to Wayne Wiegand, he will tell you that there are more people who come into public libraries and come into McDonald's in the course of a year in America.
He has some figures of this sort that are interesting.
I guess that part of what is important about the computers and why I think it's wonderful that Gates made that gift and obviously one hopes it's going to be followed up with others is that I look at that knowledge width and we're
We are increasingly in a world in which lots of people have access to all kinds of information that they use to make money, don't they?
And I have a daughter who works as a programmer, and she works for Thompson Financial Services.
And I went in there, and I saw the place.
And here are, you know, roads.
of men sitting there and gathering data that is being sold to some people who are using it to make more money.
And to have computers in libraries, to have them accessible to the general public, is going to at least somewhat level the playing field here, isn't it?
Sure.
It seems to me that it's vitally important that libraries get into that.
Of course, you preface this with knowledge wins, and you play through a wonderful World War I poster over there.
And then we talk about information and data.
I mean, there is a difference between information and data and knowledge, isn't there?
And I think this is what a lot of people who are great fans of the information...
the era of information, you know, neglect to realize that data is not knowledge, is it?
No.
It's got to be organized.
You see also at a lot of universities, thankfully not here at Harvard, University of Michigan just built a brand new library, but they don't call it a library.
You know, it's a
information resources, etc., or something like that.
I mean, they're not even calling places libraries anymore.
You have places like Columbia.
They had library schools.
That was the first one.
They got rid of that library school.
Other places where they keep them, like Berkeley, you know, I mean, they kept it with the understanding that it was going to be more computer-oriented.
I mean, they are getting away from books, aren't they?
I don't know.
Does this concern you, I guess?
Well, in a way it doesn't.
It does not.
In a way it does not, because what's happening is that the computer is making it possible for people to have access to text, to the basis for acquiring knowledge,
in a way that books haven't made it possible because you will be able to have access to so much through the web.
I'm considering publishing a work by a man by the name of Ron Bosco who has found some people who commented in great detail on Emerson's last lectures.
And he's a wonderful introduction to this.
And then he wants to print those transcripts in their entirety.
And I argue, and he didn't buy it, but I argue that we would do better to print his introduction and then to put up on the web the text of those documents and that
They would find more users, more readers that way, than they will find sitting in the pages of the Harvard Library bulletin.
And he concedes, actually, that they probably would, but he likes print so much.
How would he be compensated in a case like that?
Well, he's not going to be compensated in any case, is he?
Well, if you printed a book and it sold, he'd get a royalty every time a book sold.
was purchased.
These are little matters that have to be ironed out.
That's right.
But an awful lot of scholarly production has nothing to do with making money from the sales of things, but simply by increasing one's reputation and thereby getting... Well, you find at Stanford, which is a really wired institution, they're doing a very precise thing.
You're finding original work
appearing strictly on the web.
And if you want to read it and you want to hard copy, you download it and print it out, I guess.
So this is something you've proposed.
And whose website would it go out?
Harvard's website or Harvard University Press or Harvard University?
Harvard University Library.
No, I proposed it and he didn't buy it.
And I have a work about the French translations of Adam Smith in which I've transcribed prefaces and used and so on.
And I think that I should take my own advice here, but I probably won't because I too am, you know, I want to see it in print.
Has Harvard ever done anything like this before?
No.
So this would be... Not that I'm aware of.
And we're talking here, this is a pretty significant thing.
I mean, when it happens, and undoubtedly it will happen.
It will happen.
It's not a question of whether or not it will, it's a question of when and with which project.
I get it.
And it would save everyone a lot of money and actually increase access.
You know, as Mike Keller points out at Stanford, he says, you know, look at a lot of these scholarly monographs.
They are published in perhaps maybe 1,000 copy editions, and they cost a tremendous amount of money to buy, and they're probably obsolete the day they come out anyway.
Why not publish something like that here, you know, and update it as necessary, and people who want it can access it, and, you know, it makes sense.
It makes sense.
It does.
It's very hard to argue against, you know, that kind of logic.
Yeah.
And then you see things like the OED.
I can't imagine never doing a published OED again.
Or encyclopedias that are constantly being updated.
But it doesn't work for the book you're doing.
Of course not.
I guess what is really causing people a lot of...
is the fate of the printed book, is the printed book, you know, that people do fear that, you know, when you see San Francisco very quietly piling 200,000 books out down on the tunnel out there and on the dock and not telling anybody about it, that maybe the agenda is to just go strictly all virtual, all digital, and the hell with the printed book.
But I mean...
You know, Harvard certainly makes a statement developed with a printing book, doesn't it?
Well, it was, you know, when you first mentioned San Francisco, I was going to jump in about my sense that
that maybe it represents a certain stage in the relationship between print and electronics.
The first people who were advocates for computers in libraries, they took a lot of heat from the book people.
After all, their products were pretty miserable, weren't they?
You had catalogs without accents in them, and
all the same typeface.
And it was very unpleasant stuff to work with.
It wasn't very good.
And they experienced hostility, and they responded with hostility.
So that I think they got in their head the idea that
In order to build the new, you have to destroy the old.
And economic historians have written about that, that kind of, you know, that, you know, it happens, of course, you know, the automobile destroyed the carriages, didn't it?
And I think that's what they saw themselves as doing.
And Ken Dallin, I think, was one of the first people to get into technology in a big way.
He wrote something in 84, which was on coal published, I think.
He has a demonstrated history.
That's right, yeah.
But I think that now we're coming to recognize...
that the print and electronics are going to exist side by side for a long period of time, that there are going to be different sorts of functions that are served by the two media.
And in any case, that we can't get rid of these books that we have because most of them are never going to be in electronic form.
But maybe some places are getting rid of books
because they find that nobody wants them and that they're superannuated and that maybe they don't even have to be digitized anyway.
That, I think, is the concern.
David Bradbury at the British Library said, you know, it would cost us close to a billion pounds to build a school library.
It has been estimated that if we were going to scan everything, every holding, that it would cost 50 billion pounds.
He said, that's impossible.
That's never going to be done.
And they are a last copy official depository, legal depository.
No, they're going to keep a copy of everything, and that's the way it is, and that's their mission.
But that's the British Library.
Harvard seems to have made a decision that we're going to keep a copy.
We're going to keep a copy, too.
Is that right?
I mean, but other institutions don't have such noble intentions, I guess.
Well, we... Harvard has done some weeding.
I know it.
But very, very little.
Very, very little.
And it tends to have been done in sort of outlying libraries of the system.
For instance,
I know that we used to have a copy of the proceedings of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Stockholm that goes back to the 18th century and was one of the leading scientific societies of Europe.
And at some point, someone in some physics library or someplace like that decided, who reads this?
And
and got rid of it.
And we don't have it anymore.
We have the German translation of the 18th century, but we don't have that Swedish original.
Does that bother you?
Oh, yeah, a lot.
Now, why does it bother you if everybody's reading it?
Maybe they were right.
Oh, but at this place, you know, there are going to be people who read it.
As a matter of fact, I read Swedish, and I've wanted to consult, you know.
Is that how you discovered it was gone?
Yes, yes, that's how I discovered it was gone.
You wanted to look at it yourself?
I wanted to look at it myself.
And what was your, did you do an investigation?
No, I just couldn't, there was no point in trying to find out exactly what happened.
No paperwork?
No, there was no paper trail as to who'd done it.
I mean, you don't think it was stolen.
Why would anybody steal it?
That's a consideration.
It's conceivable, but it's a big set of books.
Better than a library.
That's right.
I would doubt that anyone had stolen it.
But Harvard is... We have students from all over the place here.
And I used to be in charge of a library of early economic literature over at the business school.
And I'd have
I bought one year a book from about 1840 in Swedish about trade with China, and damn that the next year there didn't come over a student.
and want to see that book and say, gee, I never expected you'd have it.
He knew the book.
Yes.
He knew the book, number one, and was flabbergasted to see that you had it.
Yes, yes.
Now, how does that make you feel, as a librarian?
Just wonderful.
Yeah, that's what your job is, isn't it?
Exactly, exactly.
And maybe, you know, when you first acquired it, it might have been 84 years, as in my case.
It could easily have been.
But the payoff here was immediate, wasn't it?
Yeah.
But you are applying...
the 20-year rule or the 30-year rule, that somebody might need this book 20 or 30 years from now.
I mean, did you have that kind of thought in mind?
Oh, we don't apply a 20- or 30-year rule.
I mean, it's much longer than that.
I mean, I bought books that were uncut, you know, and it was clear that they'd never been used, you know, in the 200 years since they'd been printed.
But that was fine, you know.
I figured that someday someone would come along and use it.
And when you begin to have, I don't know what percentage of the world's economic literature was in the Kress Library, but when you begin to have, you know, 20%, 30%, 50%, 60% of a whole body of literature, you know,
how much more useful it becomes when you can continue to increase that quantity.
My last conversation with Roger started that he explained quite eloquently for me the difference between a research collection and a specimen collection.
Harvard goes for research collection, where you really do get a mass of material, and then the weight of the whole thing really...
enables the scholar to come and do serious work, which is not, you know, that's what you're saying.
If you have 60 percent of the literature on a subject, you know, you've got something.
Exactly.
You know, in the old days, old days, like 10 or 15 years ago, but traditionally, you know, you have judged an institution, an academic institution, its reputation to great measure
was built by the holdings, by the size of its collections.
Do you think that still applies?
I mean, Harvard has 14 million books or whatever, you know.
And Barton Gregorian, who I've interviewed for this, you know, in nine years, built the Brown collections from two million to three million, whatever it was.
And that was important to him.
And I asked him, you know, do numbers still matter?
What do you think?
Do they still matter?
Or do you disagree with the contention that they ever met at all?
Well, it is pretty clear that a lot of faculty come here because of the library, you know.
And I don't think they think of it in terms of numbers, per se.
But they know, will know that in classics, you know.
That's a simplified way of, you know, the numbers, yeah.
But the collection, the stuff is there.
It's the collection because the stuff is here.
And they come here.
And we know that to be the case.
You think that's still the case?
It's still the case.
Would you still, you know, into the mix of judging an institution, would you take into account, you know, the size and the extent of its libraries, of the holdings in its library?
Would you think that would still apply to it?
Yes, I think so.
What I think confuses the issue, perhaps, is that you find a scholar who's working, say, who's doing biblical criticism and is able to have the Bible up in the computer and have all kinds of versions, you know,
on the computer, or someone who's doing medieval studies and has the text from Minya up there on the computer.
And people, you know, make a career out of analyzing the use of language and the use of words.
So there are certain, you know, narrow ways
areas where the rest of it doesn't matter, all of it doesn't matter.
But by and large, the historians, you can never do history without this kind of magnificent collection.
Are you a friend of the Harvard Library?
Always.
Because you've got that special issue of the Bulletin about Widener Library, Voices from the Stacks, in which faculty members wrote about the kind of use that they made.
Is that the very recent one?
Well, it's quite recent.
I've been a friend for five years, and I teach everything.
Can I take this?
Yeah, sure.
But these faculty members, you know, write about what the library means to them in a way that, you know, that is often, you know, truly eloquent.
Can we talk a little bit about the whole idea of the depository, the concept of it?
And you mentioned earlier that this is one of your responsibilities.
First of all, Jeff, if you could just give me briefly, you know, you mentioned that you were crushed for some time before you came.
Could you just give me... And then in 1980, I moved over to, you know, when Oscar Hanlon was director of the library, I moved over to be responsible for publications.
I see.
And publications including, you know, microforms.
And I worked with outfits like university microfilms and so on to make our holdings more accessible in microfilms.
And...
And then, I guess it was about 1991, the issue of storage was pulling the place apart in that the librarians tended to want to
deal with storage in one of two ways.
One was to send out whole classes of material.
And church history, for instance, was often cited as a favor to send out.
But of course, this was reflecting a modern anti-clerical view of the world, whereas all kinds of historians use church history heavily.
And
Or another approach often favored by librarians was to deal with things with the computer.
Or, you know, if it hasn't circulated, send it out to the depository.
I said, with a lot of chutzpah, I'll solve the problem.
He said.
Yes.
I said, I will send out, you know, books.
I will select what should go out to the Harvard Depository, and I will keep the faculty happy in the process.
And one of the most unhappy faculty was a man by the name of Shevchenko, Ihor Shevchenko,
Ukrainian from the Ukraine, medievalist, someone who knows a dozen languages.
And I started to write a document about how to select for stories and to explain the whole business.
And I'd give them drafts of it.
And
We would have lunch, and then he would ask me questions.
On the basis of the questions he asked me, I'd find out what was unclear.
I mean, these weren't just gentle questions.
I mean, he was pushing at me all the time.
And ultimately, I had something that I knew that it was clear because he got it.
and that other faculty members would get it as well.
And then went up to the Philol class up on the fifth floor with colleagues.
Philol, P-H-I-L-O-L, Philology.
And it's where a lot of the learned journals are.
We went up with a number of classicists and medievalists, and I'd gone...
advance, and I had a list of serials to send out to HD.
This is the early 90s now, about 91, you said?
Yeah, 91, 92.
And I started on the list, and agreed, yeah, that could go out to HD.
And one of his colleagues said, quick, where's a camera?
You know, Ihor agreeing to send something out to the Harvard Depository.
And I'd have meetings with, you know, an historian, and would go into the stacks and have things to suggest that could go out through HD.
And we'd talk, have lunch, and I'd write up the meeting so that the guy knew he'd been heard.
and gradually, you know, it was... They really thought that what we were doing was weeding.
I think that's what was basically in their mind.
That is my question.
Why was there so much anxiety about sending stuff out?
I think it's because they thought it was weeding.
They thought it was basically cover for getting rid of stuff.
Exactly.
They didn't trust us.
And, you know, for good reason.
Because librarians like to do things and then inform the faculty afterwards.
Safe and complete.
That's right.
Again, going back to San Francisco.
It was done.
That's right.
That has been a standard operating procedure.
And that's what they're doing at Cornell, by the way.
There hasn't been any talk about it.
You know, and I asked them, gee, you know, you send books off to the landfill?
And she tells us, she says, the landfill.
I mean, this is Ann Kenney, nice woman, very capable person.
I said, do you at least allow people to come in and take some of these books?
No.
And, of course, the reason is they don't want the public knowing about this.
Better to have it done.
This is what we did.
And it's done.
Sorry.
And so there must be this apprehension on the part of a lot of people who are aware of the fact that
You know, sometimes you have to expedite.
You have to break eggs to make almonds, I guess.
But I don't think you have to.
I think you can deal with the fears.
And once you've dealt with the fears, then you can go ahead.
And, you know.
So I don't...
I don't go into a section and take it apart without the faculty members involved knowing that I'm doing it.
A recent example was the Celtic class.
Celtic stuff?
Yeah, and people in the field like Celtic are already edgy because it's a very small department.
And it's going to be acts.
And it's just a first step to axing the department.
And so you have to talk to them.
And I don't happen to read the cultic languages.
But a graduate student is going through, using the guidelines that the faculty members and I agreed on, and pulling stuff.
listing stuff for storage.
So how much material have you sent out to yourself, what would you say?
Oh, I've sent out hundreds of thousands, you know.
In about four years, five years?
Yeah, yeah.
We reorganized the process of actually sending out
the book, because I can take you downstairs.
You might be interested in seeing that.
I would, and also, if it's at all possible, you mentioned that you drafted guidelines for selection.
Is this something that I could get a copy of?
Oh, sure.
Because I'd quote from it, and I'd cite it.
Sure, by all means.
This is part of, you know, how are books?
How do you decide which books?
It's almost like the surgeon.
Who do you decide gets the transplant?
And I'm sure a lot of these people, these professors feel that way.
You know, you're making a life-and-death decision about... Well, there is a medievalist who was, you know, co-chair of the library committee who said, you know, you have more influence on scholarship at Harvard than just Neil Rudenstein.
Well, he was exaggerating, but... Was he smiling when he said it?
Well, he was smiling when he said it.
But there was an undertone there.
There was an undertone there.
And...
So it's fascinating work, you see, because, you know, I figure that there's no one who handles more books and talks to more intelligent and interesting people than do I on a regular basis.
And so it's fascinating.
That's because they do take the books very, very seriously.
How about the Ukrainian?
Is he still here?
Well, he's retired now, but...
He's around, and he and I are friends.
I'm just asking this because I am, it may be too ambitious, but I am thinking about an Eastern European post-Soviet book culture chapter, you know, how it's changed so dramatically.
I mean, the whole attitude about books and what the function of books and
And, of course, we talk about computers here.
They talk about paperclips there.
I mean, can we afford paperclips or a typewriter ribbon, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
Did you see the issue of Daedalus about libraries?
Yes, I have that, that I have, yeah.
One thing I hope to do with this book is have a really good bibliography, as I did with General Redness, I think.
Yes, it's a good bibliography.
People like to know.
I'm just looking at your books over there now to see which ones.
Yeah, I got that one.
I got that one.
I collect on the history of libraries.
Any titles you can suggest on European?
I'm really looking for anecdotal things.
This is kind of going off the path a little bit here, but do you mind...
Well, before we go, if I take a few fast notes.
No, I suppose... It doesn't have to be right now, but... I mean, obviously you have these treasures.
Why don't you tell me your formal title here, so we have it?
It's Assistant Director for Research Resources.
Okay.
Do you have a VTAC thing that I could have, or so you could mail to me, or whatever?
Yeah, let me make a look.
Instead of, you know, here's my card.
And I'll mail.
and the documents about the story.
That would be great.
Yeah, this is very, very... This chapter is starting in that Harvard Depository.
Now, were you involved in the planning and the input of the needs and stuff out there at the depository?
No.
And I think almost no one in the library was involved in it.
in that what Oscar Hanlon did was... I mean, he really... And he's upstairs.
He's still here.
Should I talk to him at some point, do you think?
Oh.
If you can get him to talk, you know.
Oh, I see.
I mean, he's... Well, I mean, he's exceedingly taciturn.
Uh-huh.
And... And I...
I worked with him for a number of years, and I don't think I ever had a meeting that lasted longer than five minutes, you know.
But what did he do then?
You said what Oscar Handelman did to having some more pain to let him do.
Well, I think what he did was that he saw that if he tried to get librarians to agree on the need for this and how they were going to use it, et cetera, et cetera,
that it would never get built because of partly the decentralized nature of the institution.
This is the wisdom of years working here, isn't it?
Yeah, exactly.
And so he called in the Iron Mountain storage people and they were the ones who did the planning of it and they were
going to run it.
So he treated it initially as an engineering problem, not as a philosophical problem or as an institutional situation, I guess, is what you're saying.
I guess that's it.
I mean, yeah, I think that's what he did.
Let's build the best facility.
We're talking about preservation, air, transportation, logistical matters.
And it was a, if you build it, they will use it.
They will use it.
The will.
Yes.
They will.
You know, the emphasis can go whichever way, but he clearly perceived the need and decided that he was going to take a Gordian not approach to resolving it, I suppose.
That's right.
I think that's what you're saying.
Exactly.
That's what I'm saying.
And so then once it was there, and now we enter into the procedures for stocking it.
That's right.
And that's, I guess, where you come in, right?
That's where you enter the equation.
But I only do it for a wider.
But that first phone call was the librarian at the Fine Arts Library asking me if I would come over and talk with them and the faculty over there about how I do it.
Well, from Widener, the total number of volumes stored out there is 1,370,000 at the moment.
Just from Widener?
Just from Widener.
And there's also, of course, from other places.
Because a lot of records from other parts of the university are stored and archives and the other institutions.
And last year we sent out 131,000.
Wow.
So that's not all from the stacks, unfortunately.
Some of it's from new acquisitions.
New acquisitions?
You're buying new stuff and sending it directly there?
Yeah.
Because...
What kinds of things?
Journals?
Well, yeah, there's some guidelines on that, too, and I'll send them.
That's pretty interesting, why new things would not stay out there.
I'll send them.
That isn't really buying for the future, then, isn't it?
Yeah, and I was terribly worried about drawing up guidelines for new ones, because I figured that someone...
might say, well, you know, if we can send these out right at the beginning, maybe we shouldn't be buying them.
But for some reason, no one ever did that.
Once money is taken out of the budget to buy things, it's very hard to get it back in.
I'm an old naval officer, too, and I remember, once you say, oh, we don't need the money for that, you never get that money back again if you need it, either.
You know?
And about 55,000 items came back last year from the Harvard Depository.
Well, yeah, I want to talk about that.
Is a lot of that, do you think, faculty people putting in a request for stuff just to get it back?
Will I be able to get some of those figures, by the way, of stuff that's there?
You can just put that on your list.
I'd love to know the numbers.
I'll give you the numbers.
You can just say them and I'll pick them up off the page.
No, I'll give you the numbers so you have the exact numbers.
I'm not sure people would necessarily be delighted with my giving you the numbers, but that's okay.
I don't have the cypress source either.
No, it's okay.
That's fine.
And...
I mean, you're not getting rid of the books.
This is the right part.
No, that's right.
We're not getting rid of it.
People are sending books to landfills, you know.
That's right.
I don't, you know, these are books that are being recalled for use.
These are not books that are being recalled to be placed back on the shelves.
We have some of that.
You know, we have books that are recalled to be placed back on the shelves.
Mm-hmm.
because they're mistakes.
For reasons that I don't understand, Richard Pipes' latest work on the history of Russia was sent out to the Harvard Depository when it arrived.
Richard Pipes, you know, was
presidential advisor and one of the most respected, you know, Sovietologists, and it was sent out.
Well, it happened.
It happened.
It's back.
Ryan says the turnaround is 24 hours, so what's the problem?
That's right.
You know, and he said if somebody wants to pay 50 bucks, he can get it back within the hour or 100 bucks or whatever it is.
Yeah.
You know?
And the book is not... We're not talking about major catastrophe here.
That's right, exactly.
What is... I think that ultimately you have the room to do about 20 of these modules.
Is that about... I thought it was 10.
Is it 10?
It was 10.
10 modules, but 2 million volumes, so that's where you get the 20 million.
It may even be 2.5 million in each one.
Maybe.
And to look at one of these things...
I mean, it's amazing.
It's awesome.
And the computer makes it all possible.
As Ron Lane says, he said, I could have this a great quote.
It'll be in the book.
If I had the Gutenberg Bible, it'd have a barcode on it.
That's right.
I mean, I wouldn't know what was in that box.
I mean, it's by size and barcodes, and it's the customer, he calls you the customer, who decides, you know, the item.
The barcode is issued, and
and they're claimed by the computer, tells them the order in which to take things out.
Little ones up here, big ones down here.
It's fascinating.
It is.
You could not do that without a computer.
No.
At all.
No, you couldn't.
So we have to, you know, you can't be a Luddite in this and this.
That's right.
No, no.
And we still find...
occasionally in the Widener Stack, the 16th century book.
And we find... Wow, we're kidding.
That should be over at Hope, maybe.
Yeah, and there are lots of 18th century books.
I mean, the woman who stopped in, you know, while you were here, you know, in my hand.
Was that a case of she found something in the general stacks?
Maybe suggesting that that should go to Houghton?
Well, what we do is this I will send out to the Harvard Depository.
So what is it, just for the record?
What is the book?
Oh, the record is in German.
It's a book called Remarks on Russia with regard to its sciences, art, religion, and other remarkable matters.
Erfurt, 1788.
And what I...
This, when it's next recalled then, it will be recalled to the Houghton reading room so that it will be used under conditions there rather than someone taking it out of Widener and spilling coffee on it.
So a decision, is this a decision?
kind of an informal decision.
Now, Gene Ashton and Columbia, they've got a cute little phrase down there now for books they've designated medium rare.
It's kind of cute.
Books that really aren't eligible for, you know, rare book status, but maybe they're fragile and they're old and they really shouldn't be in general circulation either.
And so they take them aside and a scholar or a student can take it out, look at it here, but you can't take it out
an individual decision will be made whether or not I can go through the Xerox copy or, you know, but they're treating them with just a little bit more attention and care.
Is this kind of a similar thing that's happening here?
Well, what we... Your staff is finding things and bringing them to you.
Over the years, of course, Houghton has, you know, many times been throughout parts of the Widener Stack, but because of the size of it, you know, and because...
perception of what is wanted in Houghton changes there's a lot of stuff there but but our policy is that is that we will essentially send anything before 1821 out to the depository for recall in Houghton um
How do you pick 1821?
Well, because it really is just about the time that printing technology changed and about the start of the year of modern scholarship.
So these were the reasons for it.
But we also have but one rule in the storage space.
and this is worked out in conjunction with the faculty, that there is no inviolate rule.
In other words, there are some books that will stay in the Widener Stacks, even though they're 17th century books.
And an example is the Acta Sanctorum, The Lives of the Saints.
It started in the 17th century.
These are large volumes.
And they're, you know, they're indispensable.
And they've been used so much over the years that they don't have artifactual value anymore.
So, you know, we keep them in the stack.
And, you know, the fact is they are being used.
That's right.
If they're just taking up space for the occasional reader, then, you know... That's right.
Then they can go out for space.
But I accumulate, and I've got to make some room on those shelves behind you, I accumulate stuff back on those shelves for Roger.
And every month or so, he'll come over and we'll have a sandwich here, and then he'll take what he wants from it.
And I find some very nice stuff.
How many books are there in Widener?
Two and a half million?
Is that about it?
Well, I think because it includes Cusey as well, it's more like four million.
And Harvard, I guess, says about 90 libraries.
It's always about.
We never really know exactly how many.
Well, it all depends how you define libraries, isn't it?
And that includes some rooms here and there.
Well, I remember I did an interview years ago at one of the houses, and there was Matheson's Library.
It's magnificent.
Is that a library, or is that more or less... That's kind of one of the things you're talking about, I think.
And that's not really in our domain, so to speak.
So it doesn't get included in that number.
But it's certainly there, and these are inscribed books and things, and they may have something interesting that somebody...
at some point might want to take a look at it.
But I think that's the kind of thing that you're talking about.
And you have libraries.
You have one in Italy, isn't that right?
Yes.
Another one at Dunbarton Oaks.
Dunbarton Oaks.
In Washington.
Yeah.
Interesting.
And some of them are larger than, you know, even outside Widener, there are a few that are larger than most college libraries.
Well, I mean, you mentioned the business school library.
That's
And the law school.
And the law school and the medical school.
And Harvard, Yan Cheng.
And these are wonderful libraries with extraordinary special collections.
That's right.
I mean, Houghton is not the only special collections library at Harvard.
I mean, this really remains an institution of the book.
It is.
Exactly.
And it's one of the great libraries of the world.
And it's one of the great libraries of the world, and clearly Harvard is mindful of that.
And, you know, you mentioned earlier when we started that you're toying.
It's kind of like you're toying with the idea of trying to publish something on the web.
And this would be the first occasion.
It would be momentous, wouldn't it?
Yes.
Yes, I really wanted to do it.
I couldn't persuade him.
Kind of like letting your hair down a little bit, right?
I also said, you know, we can make a big deal out of this.
And I don't know whether that is what put him off or what, you know, because he's about my age, meaning, you know, he's
And I don't know whether the thought of being involved in that and having his name associated with such a venture put him off, whereas I intended that it'd be a carriage, you know, that he'd get from listening.
Do you have any thoughts on these last books, you know, last book policies?
You find libraries getting rid of books, and you wonder even if they're checking to see if there are copies in other
I mean, it is possible to take a book.
See, you don't do accession things.
I mean, you have acknowledged some weeding.
That happens.
Or grooming, I guess, is a word that you hear used around here.
Maybe if you have twenty copies of one book, you really don't need twenty of a book that nobody's using.
Maybe you're going to get rid of fifteen or sixteen or seventeen of them.
I mean, I'm sure that kind of thing happens.
I'm just throwing numbers out.
copies of Paul Samuelson's economics text from 1960 that you need to keep, you know.
But I'm wondering, are you aware of this problem of books being deaccessioned from libraries and running the risk that this may be the last copy in existence, not the last copy in existence, but certainly the last one that we know of in a library?
Is this something that you've talked about or considered or thought?
One of the earliest... One of the earliest...